---
title: "Loyalty"
date: 2025-03-26T09:29:36-04:00
draft: true
image: weirdo-loyalty.jpg
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

I've been thinking a lot about loyalty lately.

My grandfather wrote at least a few lines in a journal every day for something
like forty years. My dad has a box of these little annual journal books and the
only gap was when my dad was born. He'd write down what the weather was like,
what happened that day, maybe how he felt about it.

Through those journals, we can trace his professional life. When he was old
enough to work, he got a job operating an elevator for a company called Fafnir
Bearing, which designed and manufactured ball bearings. Those were the days when
elevators had operators.

By World War II, Fafnir Bearing was pumping out 100 bearings per minute from
their 600,000 square foot factory in New Britain, Connecticut. They were the
biggest independent bearing manufacturer in the United States. They manufactured
parts that went to the moon on Apollo 11. Those were also the days when we made
things in America.

Over those years, my grandfather moved from the elevator to the factory floor.
From the factory floor to the design department. When Japanese fighter planes
were recovered by the US military during the war, my grandfather was among the
folks who helped analyze their technology. He learned everything he knew "on the
job."

He ended his career as a master draftsman at Fafnir Bearing. He had worked there
for his entire life. After his death, his widow---my grandmother---had cataract
surgery and it was paid for by the Fafnir Bearing insurance trust. Her
healthcare was taken care of for the rest of her life.

Today's companies grow so fast. They hire and fire so fast. Reid Hoffman (the
co-founder of LinkedIn, among other things) even wrote a book about it called
"Blitzscaling" (a profoundly gross book, by the way). A generous synopsis of the
book is to grow so fast that you have built a competitive moat before anyone
else can catch up to you.

Another way of looking at it is to own the market before the realities of your
lopsided business model catch up to you because by then it won't matter! You're
a monopoly, you're a *monopsony*; you're the immovable object *and* the
unstoppable force! You'll be able to fuck everyone equally, just like Amazon
does! Suppliers? Fuck them! Customers? Fuck them, too!

Employees? Well, you get the picture. Cory Doctorow calls it "enshittification."

Imagine what business could be like if we actually cared. About people. About
their future. About *our* future *together*. Companies don't exist without
people, as hard as Sam Altman may try to change that.

{{< dots >}}

Wait, no, don't imagine, I'll tell you about one. I'm sure you know of Costco,
the membership-only big-box retailer. I'm confident you've heard of them because
they're the *third largest retailer in the world* by revenue (right after
WalMart and Amazon), so what I'm about to share isn't a function of not making a
ton of money or anything.

Costco reportedly has a 90% retention rate across all employees who stay on
beyond their first year. Loyalty is a two-way street and Costco has figured out
how to pave it. They have built a strong corporate culture around hiring from
within and many of their senior executives started their Costco careers in a
warehouse.

Does this sound familiar?

Meanwhile, internal Amazon documents were leaked to Engadget in 2022 that showed
that the company had a *150% annual turnover rate*, which Forbes claimed is
double the "industry average." Why do people want to stay at Costco, and why do
people want to leave Amazon?

The answer to that question is the foundation of loyalty. If you are loyal to
your employees, they feel safer investing themselves in you. If you run your
business like a human woodchipper, you take what you can get.

In 2023, Amazon stopped testing job applicants for cannabis use. Now, I don't
care if you smoke weed, and neither should Amazon, but the story they told us
was that "eliminating pre-employment testing for cannabis allows us to expand
our applicant pool." Let me translate that for you: *we have to backfill a ton
of roles and we're running out of people who haven't smoked weed lately.*

Think about that for a hot second. Amazon had to loosen their long-held drug use
policy specifically because they were failing to get enough people to run
through their little gauntlet.

{{< dots >}}



Who is your "elevator operator?" What would it take for them to become a "master
draftsman?" That's what loyalty looks like. What it used to look like, right
here, in this country, when we put our people first.
