---
title: "Challenge expectations"
date: 2023-06-05T16:50:13-04:00
image: challenge-expectations.png
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

This comic from "marketoonist.com" showed up on LinkedIn somewhere and made me
laugh. It depicts one person boasting about using AI to expand a single bullet
point into a lengthy email, and another person boasting about using AI to
condense a long email into a single bullet point.

I think the reason this is funny is because it's just possible enough to be
believable, and highlights an ironic office process dysfunction in a novel way.
It's a *ChatGPT* joke, but it's also a *foolish workplace norms* joke.

Let's dig into what we can learn from it.

{{< img "" "ai-write-read.jpg" >}}

<!--more-->
{{< dots >}}

Sometimes a new perspective reveals the foolishness in an activity that we carry
out with great seriousness and zeal. Writing detailed, fact-filled emails might
be rewarded on its face, and finding ways to employ new tools, like AI, to save
time in creating and interpreting them could certainly feel like a massive
productivity upgrade to each of the two people in the aforementioned comic.

But from your perspective as the reader, seeing both of them at the same time,
aware of how one cheats to create the message and the other cheats to interpret
it, it would seem that long and detailed emails are a criminal waste of time and
effort.

## Awareness is the true productivity "hack"

I thought about this comic for a long time. I wanted to figure out why it's so
funny, whether AI actually has anything to do with it, and what lesson I could
take away to share with all of you.

At first, I thought this was a comic about eliminating "toil" in your work. Many
of our workplaces suffer from pointless process and "busywork" that we carry out
because it's expected while maybe unnecessary. I started off by examining how
the promise of automation (AI in the case of this comic) might reveal this
"unnecessary busywork."

That line of thinking fell apart when I realized that what is going on in this
comic isn't actually automation. At least, not in the toil-reducing way that we
typically think about automation. Rather than reducing some necessary but banal
and uncreative work to a button-press, in this comic the computer is helping one
person produce something that the other person's computer completely destroys.

From a pure process perspective, it's a no-op. It's actually worse than a no-op,
because there's approximately a zero percent chance that the full intended
meaning of the original bullet made it through the AI expansion and subsequent
AI summarization intact. That content had no reason to exist, and in this
example its existence made matters worse.

Then I realized that a lot of the humor stems from just how *proud* these two
people appear to be, boasting to colleagues about their novel use of AI to
eliminate drudgery that they both find pointless but for some reason necessary.
It's funny because they're *proud* of cheating their way out of something they
could have avoided entirely if they actually talked to each other about it.

That awareness, the awareness that you have as the reader, and the awareness
that the characters in the comic lack because they follow office norms quietly
and uncritically, is the pivot point of the whole gag. These people work in a
cargo cult where it's believed that email length and detail causes promotions to
rain from the heavens or something, and the only thing holding them back from
eliminating this deplorable misuse of company time is opening their mouths about
it.

## It's not just talking

Awareness hinges on two things, and this is going to seem obvious---because it
is---but here goes:

1. That someone who knows something shares it, and

2. That someone else hears it, and listens.

How much pointless drudgery could be eliminated from your job if anyone who
thought they saw some actually talked about it, and if other people actually
listened? That's a rhetorical question because 100% of true pointless drudgery
would be immediately eliminated if it was that simple.

In the real world, a lot of pointless drudgery evades elimination because it
serves some other purpose. Perhaps it is a "pet process" for someone with
positional authority, or the cost of eliminating it is perceived to be higher
than just making everyone continue to do it forever.

Nevertheless, consider this opposite framing: 0% of true pointless drudgery will
ever be eliminated by *not* making people aware of it.

A naive simplification of that idea is to "be the squeaky wheel," and that's not
always bad advice, and it will probably work for you sometimes, but I don't
think that's the real take-away from the scenario in this comic strip.

## Employ your curiosity

Once again, the central pivot of the comic's punchline is that these two people
are independently nullifying each other's efforts. It wouldn't be as funny if
either of them actually liked writing or reading long and detailed emails.

The solution to this problem is not *complaining* but rather *exploring*. Even
if complaining might lead to the same outcome, nobody likes a complainer, and
for that reason a more genuine investigation is more likely to succeed.

If either of the people in this strip approached the other with honest curiosity
to ask what they thought the real value in such a long and detailed email might
be, the chances are good that the two of them would have a very interesting
conversation. Perhaps that would lead to change (and I'd wager that it would),
but it would also lead to both people understanding each other better and
permanently deepening their relationship.

What relationship, at work or at home, would suffer from some deepening?

{{< promo >}}

## Questions for you

1. What's one activity you feel compelled to do at work, but also suspect could
   be eliminated?

2. Who is one person in your life (at work or at home) whom you could learn more
   about this week?

3. What else about your world might improve with more awareness?
