---
title: Listen
date: 2020-06-04
---

Right now, everyone is trying to understand what is happening and how to
react. There are many things that we can all do, individually and
socially, to fight racism, hatred, and violence in our communities and
the country. This article isn't about where to donate or protests to
participate in or petitions to sign.

This article is about the one seemingly simple thing that we must all
do. Especially if you are a manager, and especially today.

Listen.

That might be obvious or redundant advice. It may sound easy. "I can
listen," you think, "I listen all the time." I can confidently say that
you don't. Not all the time. You may *hear people talk*, but you do not
always *listen*.

Here, I'll give you some ideas for how to create space, stay supportive,
and learn.

## Creating space is critical

Let's start at the top. Listening is important all the time, but when
there is real strife, anguish, and confusion, you need to do more than
just "be there to listen." You need to *create space* for listening.

Check in with people, individually, and proactively. If you use Slack or
something similar, send your teammates DMs to see how they're doing.
Make it clear that you are available to chat live if that would help,
and that you'll listen without judgment or agenda.

## Don't try to fix anything

Listening for support is different from listening for coaching or
advising. *Do not try to solve problems*. It's too easy to slip into
"constructive mode" and offer helpful ideas. *Resist the urge to give
advice*.

You can give advice when asked directly, but only then. When you're
listening for support, you should reply only in acknowledgement or with
genuine curiosity. Here are some appropriate replies:

  - "Yes."

  - "I understand."

  - "Mmm."

  - "I see."

  - "I hear you."

  - "Tell me more."

In this moment, *hearing is more important than reacting*. Even a nod of
your head is enough. Someone who needs support from you does not want to
hear about how good you are at dealing with your similar problems.

## Try to learn something

The purpose of listening is to learn. Often, in your job, you listen to
learn some specific and tactical thing. When you listen for support,
you're listening to *learn something that you didn't know you had to
learn*.

This is important.

While listening, open up your mind. What does that mean? It means paying
attention to statements that prickle against your perception of the
world and how things work. Those statements that make you think, even
momentarily, "That doesn't sound right," or "That doesn't completely
make sense."

That prickling feeling has a name: *cognitive dissonance*. This is a
scientific term for a real and well-studied psychological stress. There
are two things you need to know about cognitive dissonance.

First, if you feel it, you're ahead of the game. People who are faced
with ideas that conflict with a facet of their current beliefs, and who
ignore or reject them without consideration, do not feel this stress.
They have trained their minds never to grow.

You want your mind to grow, correct?

Second, cognitive dissonance is a signpost. It marks a moment of
opportunity. Your innate reaction will be one of discomfort, possibly
confusion. Take note of this, and unpack it later. When your mind
encounters this stress, it becomes more difficult to reason, but your
awareness of this phenomenon and what it means will allow you to
overcome it.

**Do not, under any circumstances, object out loud**. Remember, you're
there to be supportive. Objecting isn't supportive.

## Speak with genuine concern

If asking a question will help you learn something meaningful, ask it.
But remember, you are there to be supportive, to allow thoughts and
feelings to come out, and to *really listen*. It's not an interview, and
it's not therapy. You're just a human being listening to another human
being speak.

Be grateful. Thank the person for sharing things that might have been
hard to share.

If you follow these guidelines, you will grow closer to your colleagues,
you will help them navigate these difficult events, and you might even
learn something.

