---
title: "Create a \"pit of success\""
date: 2023-02-09T13:13:08-05:00
image: success-pit.png
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

What if there is a way to lead such that success is inevitable? What if, as a
side-effect, that leadership also improved trust, intrinsic motivation, and job
satisfaction? What would it mean for you, personally, to know how to do that?

You're probably thinking, "If that existed, everyone would be doing it, and we
wouldn't have any volatility, uncertainty, chaos, or ambiguity in our work!"

Well, it does exist, and it's remarkably simple. But simple doesn't mean easy,
and anything this important takes time and effort to achieve. If you are up to
the task, you can change the way you lead forever.

<!--more-->
{{< dots >}}

Today's product development landscape is terrifyingly complex, and what product
development teams are expected to achieve can feel daunting at best and
downright impossible at worst. The pendulum is always swinging from urgent
functionality needs to crushing technical debt.

As a technical leader, you're expected to create order and predictability from
this chaos, and to deliver the increasingly complex outcomes that customers
demand. This is the crux of the problem: how can you build something durable
when everything around you is constantly changing?

{{< img "card" "/uploads/success-pit/change-all-around-you.jpg" "In a vortex of uncertainty" >}}

"Waterfall" was the first attempt to put structure around our work, but it
withstands very little unpredictability and is therefore only suited for highly
regulated or risk-intolerant projects.

Agile methodology is still very popular, but even setting aside the chronic
misinterpretations and blatant commercialization of it, it doesn't solve the
whole problem. In its purest form (as written in the "agile manifesto"), it
provides only basic principles and lacks enough specificity that most people do
it wrong.

Neither provides the tools to address all of the uncertainties of both software
development *and* human nature.

What is needed is an *environment in which success becomes inevitable*.

{{< dots >}}

Effective leaders think about their work as *exerting force on structures*
rather than directly on people.[^1] Every leader will occasionally need to
intervene, performance manage, or directly coach individuals, but all of the
valuable durability and leverage of your role stems from *shaping the environment*.

An environment in which success becomes inevitable will have the following
characteristics:

* Self-guiding (when objectives are in danger of not being met, course
  corrections are made) 

* Self-healing (when flaws are discovered that endanger outcomes, they are
  repaired)

* Fun (do you need a definition of fun?)

{{< img "card" "/uploads/success-pit/smooth-sailing.jpg" "It's smooth sailing" >}}

When set up properly, the environment provides mechanisms that result in these
outcomes autonomously, with as little intervention from you as possible. You
absolutely *participate* (and as it happens, your participation is very
important), but ideally you no longer *steer*.

{{< dots >}}

Building this environment, which long-time Microsoft architect Rico Mariani
termed "the pit of success," will require a *strategy to discover success* and a
*set of skills to reinforce and sustain it*.

The **strategy** is what I am calling "triple-loop tech leadership," which is
based on the concept of double-loop learning[^2] and other organizational and
systems principles that date as far back as 1980. I call it a leadership
strategy, but part of building your environment of inevitable success is
teaching everyone in your organization to use it.

The **skillset** is called "systemic coaching," which applies broadly accepted
coaching principles to systems of people. Google's "Project Oxygen" research
highlighted the link between coaching and effective management[^3], and
systemic coaching is a superset of Google's own recommendations.

## Triple-loop leadership

No organization's "pit of success" will look the same as another's. This is
where the simplicity of the approach gives way to the challenge of its
implementation: you, and your organization, must discover effective mechanisms
for self-guiding, self-healing, and fun on your own.

The triple-loop strategy provides the blueprint.

{{< img "" "/uploads/success-pit/the-triple-loop.png" >}}

The three loops are:

* Action

* Adaptation

* Awareness

In each loop, perceived problems are addressed with a different set of
assumptions, resulting in a different set of possible solutions. By recognizing
what loop is present in a given situation and shifting to a different loop, a
broader set of options become available.

In the first loop, the "Action" loop, we are asking the question "Are we doing
things right?"

In the second loop, the "Adaptation" loop, we are asking "Are we doing the right
things?"

In the third loop, the "Awareness" loop, we are asking "What does 'right' mean
for us in this context?"

{{< dots >}}

Let's explore the three loops with a simple example. Imagine that you are
working with a sprint team and you have observed that stand-ups are taking too
long, or are feeling unproductive.

Within the "Action" loop, we might ask the question "What will make our
stand-ups more effective for everyone in the team?"

In the "Adaptation" loop, we're taking a broader view. Most sprint retrospective
meetings are focused on work in the "Adaptation" loop. Here, we might be asking
the question "Are stand-ups valuable, or might we do something different
instead?" or my favorite, "If stand-ups arenâ€™t working, what experiment do we
want to run?"

In the "Awareness" loop, we're going even deeper to invite a change in
perspective. We might return to the text of the [Agile Manifesto][am] itself and
ask "What could it look like for our team to value individuals and interactions
over processes and tools?"

[am]: https://agilemanifesto.org/

As you can imagine, approaching every problem in the "Awareness" loop could be
tiresome or even frustrating; not all problems require a "back to the drawing
board" approach. Part of this leadership strategy is recognizing how each of
these learning loops are beneficial to your team in different situations.

Now that you know what they look like, you'll start to see them everywhere.

Conceptually, creating your environment of inevitable success involves iterating
through the triple-loops for each issue that the team encounters---whether
that's friction in doing the work, missed outcomes, interpersonal challenges,
and so on---and implementing the best solutions.

## Systemic coaching

If triple-loop leadership is the map, systemic coaching is the skills and
equipment needed to read and use it.

Within each iteration toward the goal of a self-sustaining environment of
success, you will need to align on shared objectives, create awareness of all
the possible options and obstacles, and convert those ideas into action.

Which solution is "best?" How will we make the solutions "stick?" Those are the
questions answered by systemic coaching.

{{< img "" "/uploads/success-pit/leader-progression.png" >}}

A key component in a coaching approach is asking great questions. As you
progress in seniority as a leader, your role becomes less about "having all the
answers" and more about "asking the right questions." The most successful CEOs
have a deep understanding of their business, but they also ask powerful
questions that unlock new opportunities.

Systemic coaching gives you the skills to:

* Listen actively and be fully present

* Create crystal clear agreements

* Question powerfully to reveal unseen options

* Catalyze forward action

* Hold yourself and others accountable

As a side-effect, taking a coaching approach to leadership engenders trust,
surfaces greater awareness, and drives both learning and action in every interaction.

## Putting it together

Using an awareness of the three learning loops; skills in active listening,
agreements, questioning, and accountability; and most importantly by working on
those skills with everyone in your organization, you'll be able to:

* Build and reinforce psychological safety at all levels

* Realize the full potential of your organization's diversity

* Discover new and unexpected solutions to your most challenging problems

* Effectively delegate the tactics and focus your time on what's most important

It's simple, right? Just recognize which learning loop the situation calls for,
listen actively, ask powerful questions, and follow through.

But "simple" doesn't mean "easy." Skills take practice to master, and practice
takes time. With practice and persistence, you'll create an environment in which
success is inevitable.

## Would you like to learn this?

I'm developing a live, interactive, hands-on course to help leaders like you
implement this method. If you'd be interested in exploring that opportunity,
comment, reply, or [email me directly](mailto:aaron@aaronbieber.coach)!

[^1]: https://medium.com/@ElizAyer/annual-performance-reviews-ruin-everything-7464e07dff3a

[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-loop_learning

[^3]: https://www.inc.com/michael-schneider/google-discovered-top-trait-of-its-most-effective-managers-you-can-develop-it-too.html
