---
title: "The point of no return"
date: 2025-01-22T06:27:01-05:00
image: people_in_chains.jpg
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

In the civil war between those of us who yearn for the hallway serendipity they
got around the office coffee machine, and the ones who unlocked a more
productive and joyful way of working from their homes, there can be no winner.

The notion that this debate is reconcilable, that there is a mythical "hybrid"
solution that checks all the boxes, that with enough thoughtful compromise we
can put this conflict behind us, is blindly foolish, and chasing it is a
distraction.

That doesn't mean we can't all win, it just means we can't all work together.
The sooner we start leaning into that reality, the sooner we can get on with our
lives.

Like probably every one of you reading this, I walked out of an office building
in March of 2020, but for me it would also be the last time I would. I exchanged
an hour-long commute and a frankly chaotic, distracting open office for close to
zero commute, the exact working conditions I prefer, and more time with my
family. I was high on flexibility, addicted to the hard, intravenous drug of
choice.

As the return began, some folks I worked with started going in every day. In
many ways, those of us who were staying home were betraying them, as we forced
them to have us up on a screen to talk to us, shattering their dreams of being
face-to-face again, and complaining endlessly about the shitty conference room
audio or video (will we ever get that right?)

How do we resolve a conflict between groups of people with mutually exclusive
preferences for how they like to work? The in-person group wants the energy and
"serendipity" and empathetic human connection of physical interaction. The
remote group wants the flexibility, convenience, comfort, and efficiencies that
modern collaborative tech has made possible.

It's not purely a matter of personal preferences, either. My son started public
kindergarten in 2022, and it would be rational to assume that school schedules
were specifically designed to necessitate a billion-dollar childcare industry
for parents with no way to assemble the jigsaw puzzle of their daily calendars.
As a remote worker, I don't have to choose between walking my son to the bus
stop and paying through the nose to shift that start time a couple of hours
earlier.

Human connection is so powerful. Our tribal lizard brains will always prioritize
real, human connections over anything else. It's why salespeople take so many
prospects and customers to dinners and sports events. It's a ground truth that a
social connection can hijack reason and objectivity, for better or worse.

I want you to think about it like this. A "hybrid workplace" is, by definition,
a forced class struggle. If leadersâ€”people with positional authorityâ€”see certain
people in person with regularity, those people will enjoy advantages that their
colleagues will not. Those remote colleagues may have childcare or other
considerations making it difficult to thread that needle. Congratulations, you
just implemented a new form of legal discrimination.

For some among us, joy is in whiteboarding and fist-bumping and random hallway
chats. For others (myself included), joy is in the perfectly darkened office at
the perfect temperature and expressing myself mainly through writing. These are
not reconcilable positions, and I don't want to work with a bunch of people who
quietly resent me for mine. I'm sure the fist-bumpers feel the same way! (If you
are one, comment below!)

Gordon Bethune, CEO of Continental Airlines, said "[Y]ou canâ€™t have a good
product without people who like coming to work. It just canâ€™t be done." The more
we try to force everyone toward some middle ground, some milquetoast compromise,
some mediocre settlement, the more our work product will suffer.

I feel so fortunate to have found a place to work that checks all of my boxes.
We all make small compromises in our jobs, but let's not fool ourselves into
thinking that with enough compromise we can "solve" this conflict.

The pre-pandemic workplace robbed a lot of people (incidentally, mostly women)
of opportunity, and we shouldn't want to go back there. So let's not go back,
because backwards is the wrong direction to be facing. Let's go forward, toward
a world of choice, yes, but also of understanding.

Now, go fist bump someone. Or just ðŸ¤œðŸ¤›. You do you.
