---
title: Let's stop saying "resource"
date: 2020-07-20
---

I almost can't believe it, but it's still happening. It's the year 2020
and business leaders are still saying things like "I need one or two
senior Java resources."

This word, "resources," when used to refer to people, is *damaging to
your organization*. There are very few cases where people working on a
project are fungible assets in all practicality, but even in those
cases, not recognizing them as human beings is *insulting at best*.

If you want to be the inspiring, charismatic, and successful leader of
smart, creative people who solve hard problems and love every second of
it, let's get this one simple thing clear: we're all human beings. We
all have our own thoughts, feelings, motivations, interests, and so on.

Calling a person a "resource" (even if it is a hypothetical person
rather than an actual one) is denying yourself access to the *biggest
motivational lever there is*.

That's why the third principle of [The Engineering Manager's
Charter][charter] is "Treat me like a human, not a 'resource'." The
most surefire way to demotivate your people is to think of them as
mindless ticket-takers who simply execute the orders you give them
because you told them to.

[The Engineering Manager's Charter][charter] is based on objective
research from Google (chiefly) and other organizations, which has shown
conclusively that companies achieve better results when people are led
by managers who understand and engage with them at a human level.

[charter]: https://aaronbieber.coach/charter

So, what does that mean? How do you engage at a human level?

## How to be a human

The fundamental lesson is to want to know more about people. Whether you
find people intrinsically interesting or not, you can't unlock the
motivational power of human connection without the exchange of
information.

There are two important ways in which we become closer as people:

1.  Demonstrate genuine caring

2.  Allow yourself to be vulnerable

### One way to demonstrate caring

When I say demonstrate caring, I don't mean calling out someone's
birthday once a year. I mean really understanding what that person
wants, what they struggle with, and how their job fits into that
infinite puzzle.

A practical way of doing this is proposed in James Robbins' book "Nine Minutes
on Monday" (which you can check out [on my library
page](https://aaronbieber.coach/library)). Robbins' system is based on building
a weekly habit of supporting each team member's nine needs.

In support of caring, ask yourself, "Whom will I show a genuine interest
in this week?" When you think about this question, a specific person may
spring to mind because of something that you know they are going
through. All you have to do is recognize that person's situation by
asking an honest and open question.

If someone doesn't spring to mind, consider how well you know the people
you work with, and pick someone you know the least about.

I have found that one-on-ones are the easiest and most natural times to
get into these kinds of topics. Make sure that your one-on-ones are not
dominated by status reports and tactical project conversations; make
time to connect with someone on any topic that is not directly related
to work.

Here are a few questions I like that you can use right away:

  - "What's making you happy right now?"

  - "Who do you really respect, of everyone who has ever lived?"

  - "If you had millions of dollars, what would you do?"

### Embracing vulnerability

Being vulnerable means allowing others to see you when you are
uncertain, incorrect, or have made a mistake. It means being a
transparent and honest person who doesn't try to curate the way others
perceive them. It means owning your mistakes and demonstrating how to
grow from them.

Showing vulnerability, especially to people with whom you work, can be
very hard. But it's important, and here's why:

*It's easier to trust a vulnerable person.*

The raw truth is that everyone makes mistakes, everyone is pretending a
little bit, and as humans we have an extremely well-developed sense of
when someone is trying to hide that.

There are two major ways that you can show vulnerability to your
coworkers, and they are:

1.  Share your errors

2.  Ask for feedback

When I say "share your errors," I don't mean to say that you should
broadcast every little mistake and self-flagellate with criticism. The
most valuable mistakes to share are the ones that you learned something
from. Be willing to share what you did, why you did it, how it didn't
work out, and what you learned.

It's a great teaching moment *and* it shows that you are an imperfect
human, like the rest of us.

Asking for feedback is an important habit for everyone to get into, but
as a leader it demonstrates that you are willing to take criticism. It's
extremely important, however, that if you do receive criticism, you
accept it graciously.

Nothing is worse than someone who asks for feedback and then gets all
defensive. Be careful to leave your ears open and your mouth shut. One
trick you can try is to imagine that the feedback is about someone else
while you're listening to it.

Finally, don't feel obliged to address it. You can say "Thank you for
this feedback, I'm going to think about this for a while and get back to
you."

Asking for feedback shows people that you know you're not perfect, that
you want to be better, and that you want them to be a part of that
journey.

## We're humans, with feelings

I've had the distinct pleasure of working with many thoughtful,
compassionate leaders. At one point a few years ago, coinciding with an
influx of new people during a particularly busy hiring year, we started
to hear "resources" used now and then, and it caused a brief cultural
backlash.

At drinks with a few of those leaders one evening, they told me that in
those situations where one might say "resources," they'd started saying
"humans with feelings."

It felt silly and sarcastic and exaggerated, but at the same time, true.
It points out the two exact things that we all need to remember about
ourselves: that we're all human, and that we're not machines.

So the next time you hear someone say "resource," point out that
whomever they're talking about is a human, with feelings.
