---
title: Coaching in weird and difficult times
date: 2020-04-18
---

During uncertain, difficult, extraordinary times, your job as an
engineering manager fundamentally changes.

When the world is predictable and the team is fully engaged, you can
focus on output, set and model a high bar, give frequent feedback, and
push the team to be the best that it can be. But when the world is
upside down and everyone is living a reality they didn't sign up for,
the best thing you can do is be totally supportive.

Business goals don't go away; output still matters. But your job becomes
less one of pushing everyone to exceed their own expectations and one of
finding *sustainability* and making everyone feel that their challenges
are heard and understood.

In these weird and tough times, there is one question that you must
always ask when you are meeting with your team, and I'll get to that,
but first I want you to understand the value of a coaching approach.

## Now, more than ever, coaching is critical

My favorite description of what coaching is comes from Michael Bungay
Stanier, author of "The Coaching Habit." He says that coaching is about
"staying curious for just a little bit longer."

The reality is that you never know what a person is experiencing;
everyone's experience is individual, and sometimes aspects of that
experience are shared involuntarily, through facial expressions or body
language, but the only way to get a fuller, clearer picture of what
someone is feeling is to ask.

A person's willingness and ability to do any task is tied to their
identity, their motivations and their ambitions, their unique
experience. The only way that you can understand more of what comprises
that whole person is to ask open questions with a true intent to
understand.

Now think about the world in the midst of a pandemic where every
meaningful social norm has been upended. We don't have random chats in
kitchenettes, we don't see each other occasionally on the train, we may
not even have dedicated space in which to work. How a person adapts to
this situation is, again, uniquely and individually tied to their whole
self in a way you likely don't understand.

Think about one of your team members now. What is their working
situation? Do they have roommates or family members living with them?
Are there pets or children in the mix? What responsibility does this
person have to *those* people; are they caring for an older family
member or are they a parent themselves? Are their roommates working,
furloughed, unemployed, or trying to do remote learning?

The **only** way to understand someone's capacity to engage with you and
the work ahead is to *ask thoughtful questions*, and to ask them *with
genuine concern*. Coaching, fundamentally, is helping someone explore
their own options and capacity through intense curiosity.

Here are some suggested questions to get you started in your next
one-on-one:

  - Does X make you feel excited, or anxious?

  - If you could instantly change any **one** thing about your situation
    right now, what would that be?

  - When we talk in a week or two, what is one thing you hope will be
    different?

## The one most important question

Whether good times or bad, never forget that as a manager you work
**for** your people. Your job exists to help them succeed. Especially if
you are in the "dual role" of contributor and manager, it can be hard to
remember that although one half of your job is directly creating value
for the company, the other half is clearing a path for your team to do
the same.

There are hundreds upon hundreds of powerful coaching questions that you
can ask throughout your work with each person, but this one simple
question never loses its value. When everyone is challenged by sudden
remote work, family constantly present, schedules up in the air, and the
emotional difficulties of working while the world outside is in tumult,
always remember to ask:

**"What else can I do for you?"**

I like to ask toward the end of each one-on-one. It's OK if the answer
is "nothing right now," or "I can't think of anything." The purpose of
the question is not to get an answer, although you might; the purpose of
the question is to open the door to responsibility, to be clear that you
are always available for your team to ask things of you.

This is the foundation of support for your team, which they need now
more than ever.
