---
title: "Unplugging is good, actually"
date: 2023-10-22T06:22:27-04:00
draft: true
image: suited-guy-in-hammock.jpg
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

In the middle of 2021, a new word exploded through social media: "grindset." The
word may have been new, but the idea was not. Amid a continuing pandemic that
upended our norms of work and life, the online world rallied around the notion
that exceptionally hard work can transform a "side hustle" into a business.

Everything that was wrong about that idea back then is still wrong now, yet we
continue to glorify "disruptors" and "innovators" and believe that the
"Protestant work ethic" is the gateway to wealth. Although working hard and
committing yourself to a purpose are noble and useful habits, don't confuse raw,
unmetered, self-destructive exertion with real leadership.

{{< dots >}}
<!--more-->

In a post on LinkedIn, this person "Andriaan" wrote:

{{< img "drop" "i-hate-to-unplug.jpg" >}}

These are the words of a person who has failed to create and maintain boundaries
in his life. That's harmful enough, but it's only destroying his own blood
pressure. His true error is one that many toxic leaders also make: he's *too
present*.

I don't mean to undersell the pitfalls of overwork, here. If your idea of
"unwinding" is being perpetually ready to reply to the next trivial email that
comes through your inbox, you've bought a first-class, one-way ticket to Burnout
City and when you get there you're going to disappoint or betray everyone around
you; the same people you claim to want to support and celebrate.

Lesson number one is as follows: your personal foundation, which is how you
treat yourself, the habits and mindset that you use to make your work
sustainable, and the way you care for your own physical body is the prerequisite
to any lasting success in life, full stop.

You can probably ignore most of those things in your 20s, maybe even into your
early 30s, but if you haven't figured this stuff out by then, you're going to be
in for a rough ride. The ability to work long days, sleep little, exercise
sporadically, and eat anything you want is a gift of youth. When you lose
it---and everyone loses it---your capacity and vitality will hinge on the habits
you've created.

But the real misdeed isn't the way the "sigma male hustler" mortgages his health
to deliver value to his shareholders. No, the leader who never unplugs is also
hurting the team by neglecting the one thing they should be focusing most of
their energy on: the *environment*.

An "environment in which success is inevitable" is my term for a self-sustaining
organization that understands the broad intent to which they are committed, can
recognize its own wins and losses, and continually adjusts its course based on
observation. Creating that environment, as a leader of any kind, is impossible
if you are an active player within it.

This is a common mistake that many leaders make, especially if they've risen
through the ranks. So-called "front line" managers often need to be directly
involved. You can't be a tech lead or the manager of a small engineering squad
without being hands-on, seeing the problems, sharing your experienced opinions,
and so on.

But as you rise in seniority as a leader, as your "span of control" broadens, as
you take on the management of other managers, your focus must shift away from
the individuals and toward the systems, processes, and norms that support teams
in creating their own successes. This can often happen on the scale of many
months to many years, which makes it difficult to strike that ideal balance as
it shifts gradually from one side of the spectrum to the other.

{{< dots >}}

Lesson number two, then, is this: as a leader, your true success is measured by
how the team performs *when you're not around*.

If you have some knowledge, skill, or insight that is crucial to the team's
success on a day-to-day basis, you need to make it your top priority to share
that with people on your teams immediately, starting this week. We like to think
about team risk in terms of "What if so-and-so won the lottery and walked away
tomorrow?" *That analysis needs to include **you***.

It's important that a team be able to function when someone is away. This is
doubly true for you because it's literally your sole responsibility to ensure
that a team's success doesn't hinge on any single person. If it does, what is
the point of having a team in the first place? If your job is "being the one
person who's really good at Postgres," why are you a manager?

In short: *unplug*.

I'm giving you permission to say to your team, "I'm out this week, I'm not going
to be checking anything, here's my phone number, call me if something is turning
upside down and you can't handle it."

Use your absence as a key experiment in how well you've structured the
environment to support the team's success. Do they understand how to mediate
disagreements, discover solutions to novel problems, communicate their
accomplishments and challenges to the appropriate parties, and reflect on how
all of that is going for them on some regular basis? Do they celebrate what
they've done well? Do they pivot when things are not going well?

Make it your job to make all of the above *not your job*.
