---
title: "Interview like you're already hired"
date: 2024-03-26T06:30:23-04:00
draft: true
image: person-on-stage.jpg
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

I've been doing some technical interviews lately at `$DAYJOB`, which has been
fun and interesting to get back into. I used to interview engineers and managers
all the time at previous jobs; I've probably interviewed hundreds of people by
now. Meeting candidates and working through little challenges together can be a
nice way to break up the day.

But honestly I was shocked by how badly some of these recent interviews went.

<!--more-->
{{< dots >}}

I don't think these interviews went south because we did a poor job screening
candidates, or even that the candidates themselves were incapable of meeting the
requirements of the role. They just categorically failed to demonstrate their
abilities, which for me is the basis of a no-hire conclusion.

To avoid those pitfalls and show up as an impressive technical candidate, here
is some advice you didn't ask for.

## Prepare!

Rule number one for any interview process is preparation. Whether we like it or
not, an interview is a performance, and there is no successful performance that
doesn't start with some amount of rehearsal.

First things first: research the company you're interviewing for. Assuming you'd
actually like to land this job, you have a responsibility to learn as much as
you can about it. When I worked on Wayfair's website, would you believe
candidates came in who hadn't spent much time looking at the site at all?

My favorite thing to see was when candidates had not only browsed the website,
but had strong feelings about things we could do better, or ideas we could try.
Even if they were stupid ideas, it showed that they gave it some thought and
could imagine themselves in the driver's seat, contributing to the product.

If the product is not a public website, or if the domain is a classically
secretive one (like government contracting, defense, etc.), find out what you
can. Don't be afraid to ask specific probing questions when you speak with
recruiters at the company. They might be your only reliable source of inside
information!

{{< dots >}}

Second, but no less important: if you're going out for an individual contributor
role in software, *be able to write software*. It's OK if you've been in
management for a while, or taking a break from work entirely. Life comes at us
pretty fast and we have to roll with it, but when you're being asked to do a
straightforward programming exercise you'd better be able to do some
programming.

The thing is, I just can't trust that everything on your resume is true. A
resume is like a very blurry picture that begins to form some rough shapes, but
resumes are notoriously easy to falsify and challenging to verify, so the only
real evidence I have for your current skills is what you can do in the
interview.

And look, I know that this sucks, and I know that our industry's classic
approach to interviewing is imperfect and that it's more of an art than a
science to separate the signal from the noise, but if you show up to a technical
round and can't cobble together a couple of functions in Javascript or Python or
*something*, my faith in you is going to rapidly plummet.

I don't do "leetcode" interviews. Not as the interviewer nor as the candidate.
If you can write a depth-first binary tree search from scratch all it really
tells me is that you can memorize things. Still, spending a little time leading
up to an interview "sharpening your tools" by running through some exercises
online is not a bad idea, and it can only help you.

Get comfortable being asked a hard question and breaking it down, writing out
the questions you would ask an interviewer to steer your solution, and hashing
out the structure of the code. To me, that's 90% of the job anyway. Can you
collaborate, bring value through ideas, and translate your concepts into working
code? How do you demonstrate that?

## Set the tone

As I said before, whether you like it or not, an interview is a performance.
During your interview, you need to bring out the most confident version of
yourself that you know. For that bounded window of time in which you're showing
off what you can do, you need to *believe* that you can do the job.

If you made it into a live-coding round, you must have done something right!
This is not the time to dig on yourself or make excuses for any of your
perceived skill gaps. Nobody wants to work with someone who is constantly hating
on themselves and jumping under every bus that drives by.

If you want to tell me that you're really anxious and that it takes you time to
get comfortable working on a problem, that's fine! It can be hard to admit that
to a stranger, and I applaud your honesty. Honesty is good. Repeatedly making
fun of yourself, though, only makes it easier for your interviewers to doubt
you.

If you're going to fail, if you have the sudden realization that you're way
beyond your depth, make it your mission to flame out spectacularly! Dig in, try
hard, focus on asking great questions, and get as far as you can with what you
know. 

I've hired countless engineers who could not complete the entire coding exercise
because I know that smart, motivated people can use Google. What you need to
demonstrate is that you can see where your gaps are and that you have some idea
of how to fill them. Ask direct questions ("can I assume X?"), lean on your
resources ("is it okay if I look this up real quick?"), and be clear about what
you do and do not know ("I think a regular expression would work here, but I
don't remember the syntax").

Self-awareness is a surprisingly rare and powerful attribute. Show that you know
what you know, but frame it as a strength, because it is. Instead of "I'm so
rusty, I'm sorry I can't write this simple loop," spin it around into something
like "I haven't written Javascript in a while but I know there is a syntax for
this, is it okay if I look that up?"

Finally, asking questions is great. But asking a question, stating your assumed
answer aloud, and forging ahead without even pausing for any response is
self-sabotage. Interviewers, more often than not, want to help you, because they
want to know what it would be like to work with you. If you're going to ask the
question, wait to hear the answer.

## How to do a great interview

I'll summarize everything into a tidy list for you:

* Prepare by researching the company and its products, and forming opinions
  about them.

* Sharpen your tools: know the basic syntax of a popular scripting language that
  is likely to be used in interviews, like Python or Javascript. Assume that
  you'll be asked to write code that runs.

* Acknowledge your weaknesses, but show up as the most confident version of
  yourself that you can find.

* Collaboration means listening, at least part of the time. Don't forget to use
  your interviewers as resources to help you move past sticking points.

## Questions for you

1. What do you look for in a candidate, and how do you bring that forward when
   you are one?

2. What is one thing you want to be better at in an interview, and how will you
   practice it?

3. What can you take away from this that will help you in your day-to-day work?
