---
title: "The \"Fallacy of Stochastic Invention\""
date: 2024-01-20T07:00:54-05:00
image: particle-collisions.jpg
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
---

If you haven't seen this video that WebMD parent company "Internet Brands" sent
to their employees telling them that they need to return to the office, you
really have to check it out. It's cringe-inducing, tone deaf, and callous in
the way that American business has desperately worked to normalize for decades.

"We work better together," Internet Brands CEO Bob Brisco states in the video,
adding, "We aren't asking or negotiating at this point." The video leaked to the
public and the reaction was... Predictable.

"Well," you might say, "CEOs gonna CEO." That's true, the withering empathy of
the C-suite, unchecked by labor or anti-trust protections dissolved by Ronald
Reagan, has allowed the American CEO to evolve into a different species, one
which looks upon its employees as "inconvenient gut flora[^1]."

But all that aside, the entire stated basis of this message is fallacious, and
I'll tell you why.

<!--more-->
{{< dots >}}

Many American CEOs---and especially those who are older than, say, 50---suffer
from an extreme case of *sadistic nostalgia*. Their condition causes them to
believe that *things were better before*, and that *returning to the old ways
inflicts necessary pain*. They probably believe this because they rose to the
top of the corporate ladder during a time when the fastest way to get a contract
signed was to *send a fax*, and they believe all these people who want to work
where and when they want to are "quiet quitters," and deserve to suffer the
consequences of being set right.

Being not without some modest sense of diplomacy, or perhaps under pressure from
their corporate communications departments, none of these guys (they're all
guys) will just say "I want you back here because presiding over a visibly
bustling workplace is literally my childhood dream and COVID-19 took that away
from me." Instead, they need some sort of euphemism. An excuse that sounds
reasonable enough to convince the worker bees to come back to the hive.

What reason could there be to require people to return to their offices that
doesn't center the superficial greed of money and power and ego?

"We work better together!"

That's bullshit, of course. The claim that people produce more innovation when
they are physically collocated is contradicted by hundreds of years of
invention. The idea that serendipitous conversations around the metaphorical
water cooler create unexpected invention and progress toward the company's
goals is what I call the "Fallacy of Stochastic Invention."

{{< dots >}}

The Fallacy of Stochastic Invention is the belief that evolutions of current
ideas, the creation of new ideas, and full-on whole-cloth inventions spring
forth from these random interactions between bored, overworked people trying to
escape the grip of their unforgiving calendars to get a cup of coffee.

In over 20 years working in offices I can say confidently that the entire notion
of creative serendipity in a shared workplace is a myth. People get up from
their desks because they want to *take a break from all this shit*, and nobody
wants to get cornered in the kitchenette to brainstorm widget improvements.

History supports this critique. Most of the greatest inventions in history were
conceived by one person, or several people separately and simultaneously[^2]. In
many cases the discovery was the result of concerted research and development
efforts (penicillin, the internet) or one person's random observation (Velcro,
the microwave).

None of those inventions were conceptually triggered, nor materially furthered,
by some serendipitous workplace interaction. Serendipity has definitely played a
role in invention throughout time, but it's never been necessary for an
energetic creator to be physically around colleagues for those moments to
strike.

The modern CEO's assertion that real-time, in-person interactions are *key* to
innovating and to collaborating effectively are contradicted by hundreds of
years of inventions. Until around 1900, few people had *telephones*, so every
invention before that time in which people worked together across any distance
instantly disproves the hypothesis.

In point of fact, many of the greatest inventions of all time were developed
through the use of a long-distance communication technology called "writing
letters."

{{< dots >}}

The kind of serendipity that leads to Isaac-Newton-style "a-ha" moments exists
independent of where and how people work. Sometimes it happens during a
conversation with a coworker and sometimes it happens in the shower and
sometimes it happens while making dinner.

Creativity is the mutation of ideas; the product of misfiring neurons,
accidental connections, and "oblique strategies"[^3]. The most sure-fire way to
smother creativity is to be thoroughly prescriptive about every detail of where,
when, and how people should interact and produce their work.

Producing work in a rigorously controlled way produces rigorously predictable
results. When you are manufacturing a million widgets, it's important that they
are all made the same. When you are creating something new, you must be open to
"mishap" and "waste," because that's where all the innovation is.

You can't *force* the conditions that spark innovation or invention!

When people aren't delivering what they were hired to deliver, when they fail to
live up to the standards that were clearly set for them, that is the time to
talk about whether their ways of working are effective and appropriate. Until
then, and to the greatest extent possible, *defend creativity*.

{{< dots >}}

The technology at our disposal today is pure science fiction when seen from our
past. Our capacity to share our ideas instantly, with anyone, over any distance,
in media-rich formats is enabling the exact sorts of unpredictable connections
that lead to groundbreaking innovations.

We're no less productive, no less creative, and no less vigorous in our
invention than the people who came before us, who---may I remind you---didn't
even have Slack!

Your job as a leader is to defend the space in which creativity blooms and to
discover what is actually not working and engage the organization in resolving
it. The kind of idea mutation that will propel your work is created by teams of
diverse people with differing lifestyles and preferences, and part of your role
is to walk the tightrope between what needs to get done and honoring the
autonomy of people to accomplish it.

There has never been a time when our modern standard of flexibility and
observability has been so easy, or so cheap. How will you use it to give your
employees *more* freedom, rather than less?

## Questions for you

1. How do you create space for creativity in your teams?

2. What kinds of unexpected results do you celebrate?

3. What signals do you use to recognize team effectiveness?

[md]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_discovery
[taylorism]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_management

[^1]:
    [Tiktok's enshittification](https://pluralistic.net/2023/01/21/potemkin-ai/),
    Cory Doctorow

[^2]: [Multiple discovery][md], Wikipedia

[^3]: [Oblique Strategies](https://www.enoshop.co.uk/product/oblique-strategies.html)
    by Brian Eno and Peter Schmidt
