---
title: "Find your moment to pause"
date: 2022-03-01T07:02:23-05:00
draft: true
---

{{< img right "/uploads/slack-red-dot.png" >}}

If you don't recognize that symbol to the right, you are (perhaps) among the
lucky few... Or you work for a company that uses Microsoft Teams. The icon is
the "message waiting" indicator for the very popular workplace collaboration
tool Slack, and it is the bane of my existence.<!--more-->

This isn't going to be a condemnation of Slack, though, or Teams for that
matter. Rather, I want to talk about the hyper-responsive world that we've built
around us, and how it's going to slowly kill you until you learn to recognize it.

## The woman with no cell phone

For several years in my late 20s, I lived in a small coastal city. It was truly
the heyday of my life, working as a programmer for a start-up, living within
walking distance to shops, restaurants, bars, and the water. As you might
expect, I became a regular at several of those places, but I easily spent the
most time at a particular family-owned restaurant and bar.

I got to know the owner pretty well over the years. I would end up there for
lunch by myself sometimes, and if it was quiet (as it often was), we'd keep each
other company.

It was during one of those chats that it came out that she didn't have a cell
phone. Lest you misunderstand, I'm not saying that she didn't have a smartphone,
I'm saying she didn't have a cell phone at all. In 2008! The first iPhone was
released in 2007, and by then everyone had *some kind* of cell phone.

I recall asking her, *What if someone needs to reach you?* She explained that
she's usually at home or at the restaurant, so people can call her there, and if
she's somewhere else, they can leave a message.

*They can leave a message?!*

## The spiral of expectations

When any new communications tech comes out, which makes a new responsiveness
possible, adopting that new level of responsiveness can be a signal that we send
to our friends, family, and coworkers about how dedicated we are. But, as UC
Irvine professor Melissa Mazmanian wrote, the opposite becomes true: *not*
adopting that new responsiveness might signal that we aren't *dedicated enough*.

Mazmanian termed this the "spiral of expectations." The response time that
society demands gets ever shorter, and as a result, we lose our ability to
*simply be*.

Think about your typical day. How often do you see an icon or hear a sound and
divert your attention from whatever it was on before to *that thing*? How often
do you compulsively look for the icon, or the notification, either on your
computer or your phone?

I have only recently become fully aware of how often I compulsively look. It is
often. It is... Frighteningly, depressingly often. It is like I am *in search
of* some reason to not be doing what I'm already doing, and when I think about
it that way, it's *pretty messed up*.

This is what the constant-notifications culture has done to me; it has made me a
slave to that little dot. Because I want to be responsive, I want to be
*responsible*. I want people to like and trust me.

My friend the restaurant-owner in that small coastal city beat the system by
simply *not adopting* the new technology. To 26-year-old me, it made no
sense. Why would anyone want to be *less connected*?

But now I realize that she made the right call: to preserve her attention, that
priceless and limited resource, for only what *she* chose. How freeing.

## Be free, for a while

I challenge you to choose some time to actually disconnect, to live free from
notifications, and especially, free from expectations. I'm giving you permission
to pick an hour, or two, or more, and simply *rest*.

This doesn't mean that you must *do nothing*, although I fully support spending
some time *in purposeful boredom*. You could take a walk, read a book, draw a
picture, play an instrument. The important part is that you do this *without
distraction* and *without guilt*.

## Let me know how it goes

I want to hear your stories of living a distraction-free hour (or more). You can
comment on this post on the web, or reply directly to the email if you received
it in my newsletter, or DM me on Twitter ([@aaronbieber][tweet]).

[tweet]: https://www.twitter.com/aaronbieber

> "[T]he mere consciousness of an engagement will sometime worry a whole day."
>
> ---Charles Dickens, in a letter to a friend, rejecting their invitation
