---
title: How to be a great manager
date: 2020-05-24
---

In 2002, Google decided to eliminate managers. It went terribly (as you
might guess) and managers were reinstated. Still, Google remained so
skeptical of management that, in 2008, they assigned a team of
researchers to go figure out whether management was useful or not.

The effort was code-named *Project Oxygen*. The result of that research
is some of the highest fidelity insight into what makes great managers
great that we have ever had.

If you want to be a great engineering manager, you could do worse than
to model the behaviors observed by Google's *Project Oxygen* to produce
the best outcomes.

Here, I will briefly introduce each behavior that Google identified to
drive positive results, and then I'll dive into the ones that deserve
more explanation over a series of future articles.

## What makes a great (Google) manager?

It bears mentioning that this research was done within Google, and while
I believe these are universally applicable behavioral goals, they're
most likely to produce positive outcomes in work
environments *similar* to Google.

Specifically, these are great management behaviors for organizations
that embrace team autonomy and gauge team success through something
vaguely resembling OKRs (final, measurable outcomes).

These are the areas in which to focus:

## Be a good coach

A good coach is someone who believes in their team members'
capabilities, even in things they have not yet succeeded in achieving,
and unlocks that potential through the correct balance of curiosity and
advice.

It would be impossible to teach you how to do this in two paragraphs,
but the key point is that coaching gives the team space to find
solutions on their own and thereby to grow into themselves, rather than
giving advice or commands, which do nothing but over-leverage your time
and attention and take agency away from your team.

## Empower your team; do not micromanage

Along similar lines as the above, the Project Oxygen team found this to
be so important that they gave it its own line. **Don't micromanage your
team**. If you feel yourself wondering at any point what a particular
person is *actually doing* at that moment, resist the urge to find out.

Instead, make the outcome of the work crystal clear, be transparent
about when you want to check in, and *let the work happen*.

Will this always work? No, it won't. That's why check-ins are useful.
But if you don't give the team space to screw up, they'll never have the
chance to learn to be better.

You might also be pleasantly surprised that everything goes off
perfectly, which happens more often than not, in my
experience.

## Create an inclusive environment and show concern for employees' success and well-being

Inclusiveness and belonging are very important. Innovations are not
produced by teams wallowing in self-doubt. Creating an environment where
everyone can bring their whole selves to work has never been more
critical to success.

Take an interest in your team members' well-being; nobody wants to work
for someone who treats them like an emotionless automaton.

Your team members' actual emotions aren't your responsibility, but
awareness of them is. Creating an environment that is resilient to
people feeling their own feelings is literally what being a great
manager is all about.

## Be productive and results-oriented

It's easy to say "be productive," but what I think this finding actually
means is that great managers visibly *get shit done.*

Being results-oriented means that your focus is on *the outcome* rather
than *the process*. This is meaningful advice for two reasons:

1.  By focusing on *outcomes*, you can empower the team to manage their
    own process, to own it, and feel responsibility for it. This gives
    the team room to grow.

2.  Outcomes are generally what matters to customers, the rest of the
    department, and the whole company. Whether your team does "sprints"
    or describes work as "user stories" is irrelevant to everyone who
    pays you.

## Be a good communicator

I interpret this point in two distinct ways:

1.  Speak and write clearly, and

2.  Listen and share information effectively.

I think that Project Oxygen found that \#2 is what drives results for
teams in general, but I strongly believe that it is hard to excel at \#2
if you don't also strive to be better at \#1.

Especially in this increasingly remote work atmosphere, *writing is
critically important*. If ever there was a time to lean into writing and
learn how to be extremely good at it, it's right now.

## Support career development and discuss performance

Sometimes referred to by the odd compound verb "career pathing," this
means creating clarity for individuals on where they want to be in the
future and how they can get there.

Even for senior members who are unlikely to get promoted, or outright
disinterested in promotion, everyone has goals. People without goals
are, quite frankly, bad for teams. Even savant principal engineers have
goals; learning goals, accomplishment goals, behavioral goals, whatever.

As a manager, it's your job to uncover those, make them plain, and help
plot a course.

Nobody gets anywhere without knowing where they are. Providing timely
performance feedback is part of the process of creating a career path.

## Create a clear vision and strategy

This is one that I have struggled with when it feels like product
management owns the vision, the customer goal, that the team is rowing
toward. Still, as an engineering manager, you can create a
clear *engineering vision* or at the very least clarify your team's
corner of it.

## Demonstrate key technical skills

This one is up for broad interpretation, in my opinion. If you are a
"tech lead manager," where some big chunk of your time is spent
contributing directly to projects, this essentially means that you're
good at that; the team doesn't feel like you're the drag on their
productivity.

If you're more of a "pure" manager, focused on the people, and you don't
contribute directly very often (or at all), then I think this means that
you understand how your team's systems work, you understand the broad
architecture and how things link together, and you have a strong sense
for system design.

## Collaborate across the company

Especially as your company grows, teams will focus on narrower but
deeper areas. The result is that teams won't be able to accomplish
meaningful things without working together.

A great manager forges connections between teams proactively and
is *deathly allergic* to silos.

## Make strong decisions

This does not mean that great managers are dictators. A strong decision
is one that is backed both by data and by a holistic analysis of
competing perspectives.

Entire books have been written about decision-making, so I'll keep this
brief: hear everyone out, test your understanding thoroughly, consider
all available data, and synthesize your response in the clearest form
possible.

A practical method is writing a single page position in a Google Doc and
requesting comments from anyone with a stake in the outcome. Use a title
like "DRAFT: Important Decision" so that it is obvious that you intend
to change its content. Ask anyone with a stake in the outcome to add
comments. Finally, resolve the comments through edits and remove the
"DRAFT:" prefix from the title. The result is your decision.

