---
title: In uninspiring times, tap into the power of purpose
date: 2019-11-08
---

We had suffered a massive outage. It was so big that it made headlines
across our industry, caused tangible customer churn, and sent ripples of
distrust through the businesses we served. While nobody would wish for
this to happen, it is something that will happen to practically any
technology business eventually, and what is important is how you
respond.

I thought that my company responded perfectly. They openly apologized,
took responsibility, and enacted changes through the product engineering
organization to shore up the stability and reliability of our systems.
It was the **right thing** to do.

Everyone knew that it was the right thing to do, and everyone wanted to
pitch in to make our systems as resilient as they could be, but after
many months of this work, it started to feel like a death march. As the
memory of that outage blurred and faded, the urgency of the remedial
tasks faded with it. How do you motivate people to continue boring,
tedious work?

We know that there are three primary motivators we can tap into:
**autonomy**, **mastery**, and **purpose**. Let's focus today on
purpose.

When people on your teams aren't motivated directly by the challenge or
novelty of the work they're doing, one way that you can help is to
connect their work to its *purpose*.

By connecting work to purpose, you help your team members understand
exactly how their day-to-day toils benefit the team, the company, and
the customer. The more clearly you can articulate those connections, the
more effective this tool will be to motivate your team.

Start by thinking about *why* your team member is doing the work they're
doing. In the case of my above example, the work helped to reduce the
likelihood of a future service disruption. You could start by describing
what the impacts of a service disruption might be for your customers,
which helps to humanize the goal, and then describe the connection
between their current project or milestone and the *purpose*: increasing
stability.

I know that this all may sound obvious, but even if what you are saying
is understood to everyone, just hearing it from you in clear and
specific terms can do a lot to ignite the fire of motivation for your
team members; remember that as a manager, your words automatically carry
an outsized weight.

How will you help one of your team members to understand the purpose of
their work today?

