---
title: "Innovation isn't an accident"
date: 2023-02-26T19:00:42-05:00
draft: true
image: innovation-isnt-an-accident.png
image_attribution: Midjourney AI
anchorURL: https://anchor.fm/the-curious-leader/embed/episodes/Innovation-isnt-an-accident-e1voi4b
---

The pandemic forced a global, unexpected, non-consensual remote work experiment
and the results are still being analyzed. But one thing that has become
abundantly clear over the past three years is that *many leaders don't believe
that remote workers can innovate.*

The dominant theory advanced by these leaders is that in-person work leads to
serendipitous moments and those unexpected interactions create unpredictable but
positive outcomes for product development.

There are two key flaws in that theory:

1. Innovation doesn't require serendipity.

2. Serendipity in the office is a myth.

<!--more-->
{{< promo >}}

Andy Jassy, the current CEO of Amazon and a guy who received his Harvard MBA at
the height of the *Tamagotchi* craze, went on CNBC and said "You just don't riff
the same way [remotely]."[^1]

Tim Cook, CEO of Apple and a guy who received an MBA from Duke in the same year
Half-Life was released, told People Magazine that "Innovation isn't always a
planned activity. It's bumping into each other over the course of the day and
advancing an idea you just had."[^2]

Jamie Dimon, Chairman and CEO of JPMorgan Chase and person who earned a Harvard
business degree in the same year the Commodore 64 was released, said working
from home "doesn't work for spontaneous idea generation, it doesnâ€™t work for
culture."[^3]

I know what you're going to say, and sure, these three retirement-age white
dudes are probably not the foremost experts on the cultural capabilities of the
internet, and you'd be right about that. But that's not why they want everyone
to come back into their offices. No, they want to put things back the way they
were because they don't know where innovation actually comes from, and they're
scared.

{{< dots >}}

Innovation does not hinge on serendipity.

Let me say it again: innovation is possible in the *complete absence* of
unexpected events. Innovation can be, and is, planned.

If innovation is *not* happening, it isn't because some perfect mixture of
accidental conditions failed to materialize, it is because leaders failed to
create the environment in which innovation can happen.

Think about it this way: some of the greatest technical and business upsets in
history were the result of great product managers, designers, or engineers
solving a known problem with a new technology, way of thinking, or combination
of the two.

To credit "chaos theory" or "serendipity" with the ability to think outside the
box is to do a great disservice to all of our highly valued creative workers.

{{< dots >}}

Even if serendipity were absolutely essential to innovation (which it isn't),
the notion that these "serendipitous interactions" can only happen in physical
offices is equally untrue.

In her newsletter "Remotely Interesting," which covers people-first strategies
for working in a post-office world, Marissa Goldberg writes:

> Serendipitous moments are ones that happen by complete chance. But that coffee
> chat moment in the office occurred due to structure. You worked in the same
> physical office as your coworker and had the same work schedule. This
> structure is what brought the two of you together, not chance.

People who run into each other by the coffee machine and have "shower thoughts"
are doing that because they want a break from their "real work." Implicit in the
notion of serendipitous encounters in offices is freedom to stop and start "real
work" (or "heads-down work," or "individual work") at will.

That kind of unstructured interaction can, and does, happen in remote and hybrid
settings. Whether it can happen, whether it's optimized for, and whether it's
implicitly or explicitly encouraged, is for leadership to decide.

Some of the same leaders yearning for the serendipity of the office have
simultaneously implemented employee monitoring systems that seem to contradict
the notion that taking breaks from work generates new ideas. You can't have it
both ways, no matter what your Harvard or Duke MBA professors taught you.

These same leaders are quoted in high-profile business publications decrying
"quiet quitting" and how "nobody wants to work anymore." Meanwhile, they are
riding their employees raw with Taylorism-inspired metrics, measures, and
evaluations. It would be a wonder if anyone could have a single inspired thought
under those conditions.

{{< dots >}}

A keystone of creative problem solving and top-tier product design is diversity
of perspective.[^4] Without that diversity, your solutions will be narrowly
scoped at best, and discriminatory or dangerous at worst.

Google Plus, the ill-fated social network, initially required users to provide
their full real names and select their gender identity from an embarrassingly
narrow list of options ("male," "female," "other"). Those policy choices
absolutely led to avoidable harassment and bullying on the platform.

It's a safe bet that those decisions wouldn't have been made by a more diverse
team, and by some accounts the initial Google Plus team was essentially all men.

To build a product that works for different kinds of people, it needs to be
built *by* different kinds of people. That means welcoming not only people of
different ethnic backgrounds and gender identities, but also people who are
introverts and extroverts, who are neurotypical and neurodivergent, who are
differently abled or differently motivated.

A hybrid environment allows us to build maximally creative and effective teams.
At no point in human history has it been this easy to bring all of these people
together.

{{< dots >}}

If you want more innovation in your team, or in your business, think about what
that might look like. Be honest with yourself about how much you want to bet
your investors' cash on "random encounters" rather than deliberately building an
[environment]({{< ref "create-the-pit-of-success" >}}) that encourages different 
people with different perspectives to create energy and friction with one another.

If you're concerned that your existing creative staff are not producing the
kinds of new ideas you're hoping for, consider that what they might need is
*space* and *time*. Great new ideas are not produced by anxious, stressed,
"busy" people struggling against the yoke of a bi-annual performance review
process [weighed down by proxy metrics]({{< ref "the-one-mistake-most-new-engineering-leaders-make" >}}).



## Questions for you

1. People say they have great ideas in the shower because it's one of the few
   places left where there are few distractions. What could you be doing to
   reduce distractions for your teams?

2. How are decisions being made in your organization today? How do you know
   they're the right decisions for all the different kinds of people they will
   affect?

3. What could you do to diversify the perspectives around you?

[^1]: https://www.geekwire.com/2021/incoming-amazon-ceo-andy-jassy-remote-work-hurts-innovation-dont-riff-way/

[^2]: https://people.com/human-interest/apple-ceo-tim-cook-expects-return-to-office-post-pandemic/

[^3]: https://www.reuters.com/article/us-jp-morgan-ceo/working-from-home-doesnt-work-for-those-who-want-to-hustle-jpmorgan-ceo-idUSKBN2CL1HQ

[^4]: https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/2020/12/01/diversity-drives-innovation-are-you-investing-in-it/?sh=7106d77f54b2
