---
title: You've got this
date: 2020-06-15
---

Think of a time when you had a challenge in front of you that you were
anxious or uncertain about.

Now think of one of those times when someonea parent, a manager, a
coach, a teachersaid, "You've got this."

How did that make you feel? Probably pretty good, right? It feels good
when someone shows you that they believe in you. Especially when that
person also knows how difficult the challenge is for you.

The **two most powerful things** you can do for people on your team are
to **help them find their own answers** and **believe that they can do
it**.

That's why the \#1 principle in The Engineering Manager's Charter is
"*Point me toward an answer, don't hand one to me*."

You can [review the full Charter here](https://aaronbieber.coach/charter).

These are the two essential ingredients of "facilitation coaching,"
which is the style that I practice, and that you can start using today
to unlock the true potential of each of your team members.

## Why should you integrate coaching into your leadership?

In short: because it works. Coaching methodologies, broadly, have been
shown time and again to improve outcomes.

According to a 2017 survey of 1,500 professionals in the learning and
development industry conducted by Chief Learning Officer magazine,
coaching is the top skill targeted for growth among frontline managers
(you can see the full readout [here](https://www.chieflearningofficer.com/2018/03/21/follow-the-leadership-spending/)).

Note that this survey spanned industries. Coaching was seen as the most
important area in which frontline managers could grow regardless of what
their direct reports actually did.

Similarly, Google's manager research ("Project Oxygen") concluded that
one of the most important behaviors of the highest scoring managers was
that they were effective coaches. Based on that research, we can see
that coaching is as important (if not more important) in our industry.

## What does it mean to coach?

Indeed, "coaching" is a very broad term. There are different styles of
coaching, including "teaching" and "facilitating," which are quite
different in practice. There may be times when one style is more
appropriate than another.

In my practice, I focus on "facilitation" coaching, which is an approach
based on open questions and active listening. An advantage of
facilitation coaching is that you, as the coach, don't need any specific
knowledge of the problem space. It isn't your job to provide answers,
but rather to change someone's perspective so that they can discover the
answers on their own.

As a "teaching" coach, you mix in more concrete knowledge sharing,
helping someone to develop real-world skills through advice and
demonstration. There is another word we use more often for this
approach, which is "mentorship." A mentor shares experience and
knowledge, but also guides and asks questions.

It is quite likely that in the real world, you'll move fluidly between
these two styles depending on the problem and the person.

## If you do nothing else, do this one thing

Everyone likes a quick and easy answer, so here it is. If you want to
introduce a coaching methodology into your leadership, here is one thing
you can do right away:

*Be more curious*.

That's it. If you can do that, you can begin to integrate the coaching
mindset into all of your conversations and drive everyone around you to
grow and succeed. It sounds easy, doesn't it? Trust me, it can be pretty
tricky\!

As an engineering manager, you're responsible for helping a team of
people do something *you know how to do*, and it's very likely that you
know how to do it *pretty damn well*, too.

So here's the trick: when you're talking to a teammate and they tell you
about a specific problem they're having, you're going to recognize it.
You're going to remember when you faced that problem. You're going to
have a thousand ideas about how to solve it.

You're going to want to give advice.

This is the moment of truth, the test of your coaching mettle. **Do.
Not. Give. Advice.** For just a couple more minutes, challenge yourself
to ask another question or two. Here are a couple of good ones to start
with:

  - What have you tried so far?

  - Is there a smaller piece of the problem you could go after first?

  - What would have to happen for this to be easy to solve?

The point is not to solve the problem, but rather to help someone to see
it from a different direction. Most people are ultimately able to solve
their own problems, they just need to see the problem more clearly or
see the options in front of them.

Remember that the most powerful questions start with "what" or "how."
This isn't an interrogation or tribunal, so it is not often useful to
ask "why" questions.

In fact, almost any "why" question that you actually want the answer to
can be rephrased as a "what" or a "how" and yield better results. That
is a topic for a future article perhaps.

## There's more to it than that, right?

Yes, absolutely. If coaching was just a matter of asking a couple pithy
"how" questions, we wouldn't have an industry built around it and
countless books written about it. I call it a practice because, like all
things, you get better at it by practicing it.

Also, like all things that you learn, don't be afraid to be bad at it,
because you will be at first. Here are my top suggestions for starting
out:

  - Don't be afraid of silence. You might need time to think of a good
    question, but you'll also be surprised how silence helps bring out
    new ideas.

  - Try not to be embarrassed by asking questions that don't land. Even
    a question that doesn't go where you want it to still brings out
    information, so focus on that.

  - Be bold. Don't shy away from asking "big" questions, like "How will
    you feel about this a year from now?" or "If everything goes exactly
    the way you want, what will the world look like?" Zooming in and out
    helps people re-frame their thinking.

  - Be open about it. If you are nervous about how it will be received,
    you can start the conversation with "I am going to coach you through
    this, is that OK?"

**Finally, read books.**

There are so many coaching books out there. Some are great and, well,
some are not. If you want to read just one book, I really like *The
Coaching Habit* by Michael Bungay Stanier.

I like it because:

1.  It's short.

2.  It's practical.

3.  The author has a sense of humor.

If you want to pick up a copy, you can [check it out in my
library](https://aaronbieber.coach/library). If you purchase it through there, I
get a tiny cut, which pays to run the website for about half a day, believe it
or not.  So buy two, please. Iâ€™m just kidding. But not really.

Finally, as always, send me your feedback. You can email, tweet at me
[@aaronbieber](https://twitter.com/aaronbieber), or leave a comment.

